Archosauriformes (Greek for 'ruling lizards', and Latin for 'form') is a clade of diapsid reptiles that developed from archosauromorph ancestors some time in the Late Permian (roughly 250 million years ago). It was defined by Jacques Gauthier (1994) as the clade stemming from the last common ancestor of Proterosuchidae and Archosauria (the group that contains crocodiles, pterosaurs and dinosaurs (including birds); Phil Senter (2005) defined it as the most exclusive clade containing Proterosuchus and Archosauria.These reptiles, which include members of the family Proterosuchidae and more advanced forms, were originally superficially crocodile-like animals with sprawling gaits and long snouts. Unlike the bulk of their therapsid contemporaries, the proterosuchids survived the catastrophe at the end of the Permian. Within a few million years after the beginning of the Triassic, the archosauriformes had diversified past the "proterosuchian" grade. Other archosauriforms include the Erythrosuchidae (some of the earliest sauropsid apex predators), the Euparkeriidae (small, agile reptiles), and a variety of other strange reptiles such as proterochampsids, Vancleavea, Doswellia, and Asperoris. The most successful archosauriforms, and the only members to survive into the Jurassic, were the archosaurs. Archosauria includes crocodylians, birds, and extinct relatives such as aetosaurs, rauisuchids, pterosaurs, and non-avian dinosaurs.Pre-Euparkeria Archosauriformes have previously been included in the suborder Proterosuchia of the order Thecodontia. Under modern cladistic methodology, Proterosuchia and Thecodontia have been rejected as paraphyletic assemblages, and the pre-archosaurian taxa are simply referred to as basal Archosauriformes. In 2016, Martin Ezcurra provided a name for the clade including all archosauriforms more crownward than erythrosuchids. He named the clade Eucrocopoda, which translates to "true crocodile feet" in reference to the possession of a crocodilian-style crurotarsal ankle.

