Description 
M.electricus, a thickset fish with six mouth barbels and a single fin on its back, just anterior to the rounded tail fin. It is brownish or grayish, irregularly spotted with black, and attains a length and weight of about 1.2 metres and 23 kilograms M. electricus is capable of generating and controlling the discharge of up to 450 volts of electricity. It uses its power to defend itself and to capture prey. 
Distribution
In Africa :Nile and tropical Africa (exclusive of Lake Victoria), the Lake Turkana, Lake Chad and Senegal basins.
Biology 
Occurs among rock  favors standing water. Active at night, feeding mainly on fish stunned by electric shocks. The electric organ, capable of discharging 300-400 V, is derived from pectoral muscle and surrounds almost the entire body. It is used both for prey capture and defense
Life History 
This is an old world catfish and it is reputed that Doctors in ancient Egypt used shocks from the Electric Catfish to reduce the pain of arthritis. This trait is still used today in some areas. It also has the earliest reference of them as hieroglyphics on the walls of ancient Egyptian tombs some 5000 years.
Economy 
Malapterurus electricus is eaten as food in parts of Africa. Being a food fish, M. electricus is also encountered in the pet trade as an aquarium fish.
The electric organs of Malapterurus have been used in studies of neuronal metabolism, axonal transport.
Migration 
Malapterurus electricus have been a sea torpedo that managed to migrate upstream.
Reproduction 
In their natural habitat they form pairs and lay their eggs in excavated cavities or holes. The male takes the eggs into his mouth.There have been rumours that they are mouth brooders.It is also unknown how the fry is immune to the electric shocks by the parents
References 
Norris, S.M., 2002. A revision of the African electric catfishes, family Malapteruridae , with erection of a new genus and descriptions of fourteen new species, and an annotated bibliography. Ann. Mus. R. Afr. Centr., Sci. Zool., 289:155 p
Sagua, V. 1987. On a new species of electric catfish from Kainji, Nigeria, with some observations on its biology. J. Fish Biol., 30: 75-89.
the male tends toclutch. Others report that the male takes the eggs into his mouth. It is also unknown how the fry is immune to the electric shocks by the parents