An N-acylethanolamine (NAE) is a type of fatty acid amide formed when one of several types of acyl group is linked to the nitrogen atom of ethanolamine. These amides conceptually can be formed from a fatty acid and ethanolamine with the release of a molecule of water, but the known biological synthesis uses a specific phospholipase D to cleave the phospholipid unit from N-acylphosphatidylethanolamines. Another route relies on the transesterification of acyl groups from phosphatidylcholine by an N-acyltransferase (NAT) activity. The suffixes -amine and -amide in these names each refer to the single nitrogen atom of ethanolamine that links the compound together: it is termed "amine" in ethanolamine because it is considered as a free terminal nitrogen in that subunit, while it is termed "amide" when it is considered in association with the adjacent carbonyl group of the acyl subunit.  Names for these compounds may be encountered with either "amide" or "amine" varying by author.Examples of N-acylethanolamines include:
Anandamide (N-arachidonoylethanolamine; NAE) or arachidonoylethanolamine (AEA: C22H37NO2; 20:4, ω-6) is the amide of arachidonic acid (C20H32O2; 20:4, ω-6) and ethanolamine (MEA: C2H7NO). It is the ligand of both cannabinoid receptors and vanilloid receptor that attenuates pain sensation.
N-Palmitoylethanolamine (PEA: C18H37NO2; 16:0) is the amide of palmitic acid (C16H32O2; 16:0) and ethanolamine. It is a ligand at CB2 receptors. It has anti-inflammatory activity and also attenuates pain sensation in mammals. NAE 16:0 has also been identified in plants including corn, and seeds of cotton, okra, tomato, castor bean, soya bean and peanuts, but its physiological functions remain unknown,
N-Oleoylethanolamine (OEA: C20H39NO2; 18:1, ω-9)  is the amide of oleic acid (C18H34O2; 18:1) and ethanolamine.  It has anorexic effects and enables fat breakdown by stimulating PPAR-alpha. In plants, NAE 18:1 is present abundantly in dry seeds and levels decline during seed imbibition, but its physiological functions are yet to be elucidated. In humans, plasma OEA levels are also found positively correlated with positive mood and emotions.
N-Stearoylethanolamine (SEA: C20H41NO2; 18:0) is the amide of stearic acid (C18H36O2) and ethanolamine.  It has pro-apoptotic activity.  It operates independently of the known cannabinoid and vanilloid receptors targeted by anandamide. It is an inhibitor of the sphingolipid signaling pathway, via specific ceramidase inhibition (ceramidase converts ceramide to sphingosine) and blocks the effects of TNF- and arachidonic acid on intracellular Ca2+ concentration.
N-Docosahexaenoylethanolamine (DHEA: C24H37NO2; 22:6, ω-3), or Anandamide (22:6, n-3) "synaptamide", is the amide of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA: C22H32O2; 22:6, ω-3) and ethanolamine (MEA: C2H7NO). It can act at CB2 receptors, and have anti-proliferative effects on prostate cancer cell lines and promotes synaptogenesis, neurogenesis and neuritogenesis, and as an endogenous metabolite of DHA, it promotes brain development and function.
N-Docosatetraenoylethanolamine (DEA: C24H41NO2; 22:4,ω-6) act on the CB1 receptor, and possible CB2.
N-Eicosapentaenoylethanolamide (EPEA: C22H35NO2; 20:5, ω-3) or Anandamide (20:5, n-3). It is the amide of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA: C20H30O2; 20:5, n-3), that can act on CB2 receptors in combination with PPAR-gamma to decrease LPS induced adipocyte IL-6 and MCP-1 levels.
N-homo-gamma-linolenoylethanolamine, or Anandamide (20:3,n-6) (HGLEA: C22H39NO2; 20:3,ω-6).These bioactive lipid amides are generated by the membrane enzyme NAPE-PLD, and natural bile acids regulate this essential process. A LEI-401 enzyme is found to be a CNS-active NAPE-PLD inhibitor, that modulate NAE biosynthesis, and with similar effect like a cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonist, which could be reversed by a FAAH inhibitor.The effects of NAE 20:4 (AEA) and another endocannabinoid 2-Arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG: C23H38O4; 20:4, ω-6 ) is found to be enhanced by “entourage compounds”, NAEs that inhibit their hydrolysis via substrate competition, and thereby prolong their action. These compounds include N-palmitylethanolamide (PEA, NAE 16:0), N-oleoylethanolamide (SEA, NAE 18:0), and cis-9-octadecenoamide (OEA, oleamide, NAE 18:1).All are members of the endocannabinoidome (eCBome), a complex lipid signaling system composed of more than 100 of fatty acid-derived mediators and their receptors, its anabolic and catabolic enzymes of more than 50 proteins, which are deeply involved in the control of energy metabolism and its pathological deviations, as well as immunosuppression. NAE's are also involved in modulation of different physiological processes such as pain, stress, anxiety, appetite, cardiovascular function and inflammation. A study suggest the presence of an endogenous NAE tone control emotional behavior, and perhaps the difference in personalities.Raphael Mechoulam that described and named Anandamide in 1992. He said:

Look, I believe there are 8 billion people on this planet, and I believe there are 8 billion different personalities. One way of explaining it is, there are several hundred compounds, endocannabinoid-like compounds. They are like anandamide in their chemical structure, that are present in the brain, and it is quite possible that each one of us, has a different, slightly different level of these compounds. And it is quite possible that differences in the endocannabinoid system, endocannabinoid-like system, can have something to do with the different personalities, and that ratios of 10 of these to 10 of others and so on will cause that. in the YouTube video The Scientist, released in 2015.
Beyond vertebrates NAEs are also found to have signaling roles in more primitive organism, implicated as metabolic signals that coordinate nutrient status and lifespan determination in Caenorhabditis elegans, and detected in organisms as diverse as yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), freshwater fish (Esox lucius and Cyprinus carpio), bivalve mollusc (Mytilus galloprovincialis), protists (Tetrahymena thermophila), slime mold (Dictyostelium discoideum), microbes such as bacteria, fungi, and viruses, are all organisms that appear to regulate their endogenous NAE levels via similar enzymatic machinery as mammalian vertebrates, show a widespread occurrence of NAEs, from single-celled organisms to humans, and a highly conserved role for this group of lipids in cell signaling. Studies in amphibians and birds show that endocannabinoid signaling may function as a behavioral switch, allowing redirection from less- to more-essential behaviors in response to emergent environmental changes, and provide evidence of cannabinoid modulation of aggression, emesis, feeding behavior, locomotor activity, reproductive behaviors, vocal learning, sensory perception and stress responses.

