Pediobius foveolatus (Crawford) (Fig. 1 and 3), is a tiny exotic parasitoid wasp that is used for biological control of Mexican bean beetle, Epilachna varivestis (Fig. 2), an important insect pest of snap beans, lima beans, and sometimes soybeans mainly found at economic levels in the eastern United States. Pediobius foveolatus is in the family Eulophidae, and is the most successful biological control agent for Mexican bean beetle.  This wasp only attacks beetle larvae, not eggs or adults. It is commonly used by smaller, organic growers; but is also mass released throughout the state of New Jersey, by their state department of agriculture.Pediobius foveolatus was discovered in India, and is native to most of southern Asia and Japan.  In its native range, Pediobius foveolatus either overwinters in host larvae, or not at all due to the lack of a cold season.  In the United States, however, Pediobius foveolatus cannot survive cold winter months because all North American hosts (Mexican bean beetle and Squash beetle, Epilachna borealis) overwinter as adults, not larvae. Therefore, Pediobius foveolatus wasps die off each winter, and must be released annually in order to provide ongoing control of Mexican bean beetle or Squash beetle in the United States.  Wasps are mass produced by, and can be purchased from, the New Jersey Department of Agriculture and other commercial insectaries.Female Pediobius foveolatus wasps lay around 20 eggs in a single beetle larva. Pediobius foveolatus larvae hatch within the beetle larva, and begin to feed.  This eventually kills the beetle larva, causing it eventually turn brown. The dead, brown beetle larva is called a "mummy"). (Fig. 2)  Adult wasps emerge from the larvae after about 15 days, mate, and search for more beetle larvae to parasitize.  Pediobius foveolatus wasps will also parasitize the larvae of squash beetle, Epilachna borealis, a closely related species that feeds on cucurbit crops.  Pediobius foveolatus wasps are extremely small, about 1-2mm long (Fig. 1 and 3), and will not harm humans, beneficial insects, or any organisms outside the beetle genus Epilachna.