The Philippine slow loris (Nycticebus menagensis) is a strepsirrhine primate and a species of slow loris that is native to the north and east coastal areas of the island of Borneo, as well as the Sulu Archipelago in the Philippines.  The species was first named as the Bornean slow loris in 1892, but lumped into the widespread Sunda slow loris (N. coucang) in 1952. However, it was promoted to full species status – again as the Bornean slow loris – based on molecular analysis in 2006.  In 2013, two former subspecies of the Bornean slow loris were elevated to species status, and a new species—N. kayan—was recognized among the Bornean population.
Weighing 265–300 grams (9.3–10.6 oz), it is one of the smallest of the slow lorises, and can be distinguished from other slow lorises by its pale golden to red fur, the lack of markings on its head, and consistent absence of a second upper incisor.  Like other slow lorises, it has a vestigial tail, round head, short ears, a curved grooming claw for grooming, and a gland that produces an oily toxin that the animal uses for defense. The Philippine slow loris is arboreal, nocturnal, and occurs in low densities, making it difficult to locate.  It is also the least studied of Indonesia's slow lorises.  It is found at elevations between 35–100 meters (115–328 ft) in primary and secondary lowland forest, gardens, and plantations.  Information about its diet is limited, but it is suspected to be one of the more insectivorous slow loris species, and is also known to eat gum from woody plants.
The Bornean slow loris species complex – including the Philippine slow loris – was classified as "Vulnerable" by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) in 2008, is included in CITES Appendix I, which prevents international commercial trade, and is protected by Indonesian law.  Prior to being divided into four distinct species in 2013, it was found in numerous protected areas within its range, making it the least threatened of the slow lorises.  However, since the taxonomic split, it may face a higher risk of extinction.  It is sparsely distributed throughout its range and is threatened by illegal wildlife trade, including the exotic pet trade, and habitat loss.