Betta splendens (commonly known as the Siamese fighting fish or betta) is a freshwater fish that can be found in Cambodia, Laos, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, and Vietnam. While colloquially known and marketed as the "betta", it is one of 73 species comprising the genus Betta. Siamese fighting fish (betta splendens) are among the most popular and widely available aquarium fish in the world, due to their varied and vibrant colour, diverse morphology, and relatively low maintenance.Varieties bred of Siamese fighting fish is the most well-known and the most widespread in central plain of Thailand.Their famously vibrant colours, large and flowy fins, and aggressive behaviour are the result of generations of intensive artificial selection, for which they are sometimes known as "designer fish of the aquatic world".According to Froese and Pauly (2019) B. splendens are native to Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam, however according to Nico and Neilson (2019): “Tropical Asia. Native to Southeast Asia including the northern Malay Peninsula, central and eastern Thailand, Kampuchea, and southern Vietnam (Witte and Schmidt 1992).” The earliest record of the betta fish in Thailand 
was during the Thonburi Period (1767–1782) During the reign of King Rama III, he gave bettas to a Thai man, who later on handed it over to Theodore Cantor, a Danish physician, zoologist, and botanist.
In 1849, Theodore Cantor named the fish Macropodus pugnax. But in 1909, Charles Tate Regan renamed the fish to Betta splendens.Bettas are well known for being highly territorial, with males prone to attacking each other if housed in the same tank; without a means of escape, this will usually result in the death of one or both fish. Female bettas can also become territorial towards one other in confined spaces. Bettas are exceptionally tolerant of low oxygen levels and poor water quality, owing to their special labyrinth organ, a characteristic unique to the suborder Anabantoidei that allows for the intake of surface air.In addition to its worldwide popularity, the Siamese fighting fish is the national aquatic animal of Thailand, which remains the primary breeder and exporter of bettas for the global aquarium market. Despite their abundance as pets, B. splendens is listed as "vulnerable" by the IUCN, due to increasing pollution and habitat destruction.