[('Gelechia', 'Gelechia is a genus of moths in the family Gelechiidae. The type species is Gelechia rhombella.', ['https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/74/Red_Pencil_Icon.png', 'https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/ee/Gelechia_hippophaella.jpg', 'https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg']), ('Gelechia abjunctella', 'Gelechia abjunctella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in South Africa.Adults are blackish cinereous, the forewings with a few black points and with some cinereous speckles, wholly cinereous along the exterior border. The exterior border is very oblique. The hindwings are pale cinereous, shining.', []), ('Gelechia aglossella', 'Gelechia aglossella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in South Africa.Adults are cinereous, the forewings slightly rounded at the tips and with speckles here and there clustering and forming four incomplete bands. The exterior border is slightly convex and very oblique. The hindwings are pale cinereous.', []), ('Gelechia albatella', 'Gelechia albatella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Sri Lanka.Adults are whitish, the forewings speckled with fawn-colour and with the exterior border extremely oblique.', []), ('Gelechia albisparsella', 'Gelechia albisparsella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from Alabama, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Mississippi, Ohio and Tennessee.The wingspan is about 15 mm. Adults are dark brown, the forewings faintly suffused with ochreous and sparsely and indistinctly sprinkled with white scales, which at the beginning of the costal cilia become a little more distinct, forming a narrow, clouded whitish fascia pointing a little obliquely backwards.The larvae feed on Platanus occidentalis. They skeletonize the leaves of their host plant.', []), ('Gelechia albomaculata', 'Gelechia albomaculata is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in the Russian Far East (Primorye) and China (Jilin).', []), ('Gelechia allomima', 'Gelechia allomima is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in the Democratic Republic of Congo (North Kivu).', []), ('Gelechia allotria', 'Gelechia allotria is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North Africa, where it has only been recorded from Algeria.\nThe wingspan is about 11 mm. The forewings are grey and the hindwings brown.', []), ('Gelechia anarsiella', 'Gelechia anarsiella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from Colorado.There are two or three microscopic whitish specks or white scales scattered over the wings, and the cilia are pale-grey, dusted with dark grey or blackish scales. The hindwings are of a bluish smoky hue.The larvae feed on Ceanothus species, spinning a delicate web over the leaf it is feeding on, hiding in a silken tube in a folded leaf or between leaves. The larvae are green, faintly brownish shaded to the spiracles, then clear green. The head is shining black.', []), ('Gelechia angustella', 'Gelechia angustella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Sri Lanka.Adults are whitish, smooth and shining, the forewings with some aeneous streaks, two of which are larger than the others. Of these, one extends obliquely outward \nfrom the exterior costa, and the other is along the apical part of the costa. The exterior border is extremely oblique.', []), ('Gelechia anomorcta', 'Gelechia anomorcta is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in the Russian Far East and Japan.\nThe wingspan is 15–16 mm. The forewings are greyish-ochreous or pale fuscous, more or less generally mixed or suffused rather dark fuscous and with a spot of dark fuscous suffusion on base of the costa. The stigmata form irregular or roundish suffused dark fuscous spots, the plical smallest, obliquely before the first discal, the discal rather large, sometimes pale suffusion between these. There is a cloudy usually indistinct pale ochreous spot on the costa at three-fourths, preceded by a blotch of dark fuscous suffusion, a moderate transverse fascia of dark suffusion from this more or less distinctly indicated. A marginal series of cloudy dark fuscous dots is found around the posterior part of the costa and termen. The hindwings are grey, paler towards the base.', []), ('Gelechia anthochra', 'Gelechia anthochra is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Australia, where it has been recorded from Queensland and New South Wales.The wingspan is about 16 mm. The forewings are pale ochreous-white, with dark fuscous markings. There is a short oblique mark on the costa near the base, a spot just beneath costa at one-fourth and a second larger, obliquely beneath and before it. A third is smaller, and placed obliquely beneath and beyond the \nfirst and a fourth is very small, immediately above the third. A fifth is similar to the fourth, and in a line with it, beyond the middle. There is also a \nsuffused spot on the costa at three-fourths, emitting a row of very suffused spots around the apex to the hindmargin above the anal angle. The hindmarginal and apical area are more or less irregularly suffused with fuscous. The hindwings are greyish-fuscous.', []), ('Gelechia anthracopa', 'Gelechia anthracopa is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in China (Shanghai).The wingspan is 12–13 mm. The forewings are whitish, irregularly sprinkled grey and dark grey with small blackish spots on the base of the costa and dorsum. There is a black dot above the fold at one-fifth. The stigmata form black spots, the plical beneath the first discal, the second discal transverse. There is a pre-marginal series of large blackish dots around the posterior half of the costa and termen to before the tornus. The hindwings are light grey, towards the base paler or whitish.', []), ('Gelechia arotrias', 'Gelechia arotrias is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in South Africa, where it has been recorded from KwaZulu-Natal.The wingspan is about 21 mm. The forewings are dark purplish-fuscous, lighter and crimson-tinged towards the base of the costa, darkest above the dorsal stripe. There is a pale ochreous-yellowish dorsal stripe from the base to near the tornus, rather broad towards the middle but narrowed to the extremities, before the posterior extremity emitting an oblique bar to two-thirds of the disc. The hindwings are rather light fuscous, somewhat darker posteriorly.', []), ('Gelechia asinella', 'Gelechia asinella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in France, Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Italy, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovenia, Serbia, Hungary, Romania and Poland, as well as on Corsica.The wingspan is 16–17 mm.The larvae feed on narrow leaved Salix species.', ['https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/52/Gelechia_asinella.jpg']), ('Gelechia aspoecki', 'Gelechia aspoecki is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in southern France.', []), ('Gelechia atlanticella', 'Gelechia atlanticella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Morocco and Spain.\nThe wingspan is 19–20 mm. The forewings are greyish brown mottled with whitish and with short black streaks at the base and in the fold. There is  a broad median longitudinal streak interrupted by two whitish spots and there are several black spots on the termen.\nThe larvae feed on the leaves of Juniperus thurifera. They have a light green body and blackish brown head.', []), ('Gelechia atrofusca', 'Gelechia atrofusca is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Russia.The Latin specific epithet atrofusca refers to dark-swarthy, dark-brown coloured, atro-fuscus.', []), ('Gelechia badiomaculella', 'Gelechia badiomaculella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from Kentucky.The forewings are dark brown, with a short distinct ochreous-yellow oblique costal streak about the basal quarter, pointing towards a small ochreous-yellow raised tuft just within the middle of the dorsal margin. Between this tuft and the costa, but nearest to the costa, is an indistinct ochreous-yellow patch and on the disc are two minute ochreous yellow tufts. An ochreous-yellow streak is found at the base of the costal cilia, and another opposite it at the base of the dorsal cilias, nearly meeting in the middle of the wing. A row of minute ochreous-yellow tufts is found around the apex at the base. The tufts \nand spots are all pale ochreous yellow.', []), ('Gelechia basipunctella', 'Gelechia basipunctella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in from central Europe to Russia (Middle Volga, southern Ural, southern Siberia), Turkey and Mongolia.The larvae feed on Salix species.', ['https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/df/Wikispecies-logo.svg', 'https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg']), ('Gelechia bathrochlora', 'Gelechia bathrochlora is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Brazil.The wingspan is about 9 mm. The forewings are grey suffusedly irrorated black with ochreous-white markings. There is a basal patch occupying one-fourth of the wing, enclosing a small black spot on the base of the costa, as well a small semi-oval spot on the middle of the costa and a large hemispherical tornal spot, and a small rounded spot on the costa opposite its posterior portion. The hindwings are grey.', []), ('Gelechia bergiella', 'Gelechia bergiella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae first described by Karl August Teich in 1886. It is found in Lithuania.', []), ('Gelechia bianulella', 'Gelechia bianulella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from California, Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas.The wingspan is 17–19 mm. The forewings are light grey speckled blackish, the veins more or less marked with blackish lines and with a broad white costal streak slightly speckled dark grey from the base to about the middle, marked with a small blackish spot on the base of the costa and a fine linear subcostal mark beyond this. The discal stigmata form round spots of blackish suffusion ringed whitish, the posterior two-thirds of the cell mostly suffused blackish round these, the plical stigma indicated by a blackish longitudinal mark beneath the first discal. Towards the posterior half of the costa and termen, the groundcolour is somewhat streaked whitish suffusion between the veins. The hindwings are whitish-grey, the veins suffused grey.', []), ('Gelechia bistrigella', 'Gelechia bistrigella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from Ontario.The forewings are dark brown, a little bronzed and with a little ochreous intermixed, especially in two small patches, one of which is just before the middle and the other about the middle of the wing. There is a small whitish costal streak at the beginning of the costal cilia and another at the beginning of the dorsal cilia. The hindwings are pale ochreous with a silvery lustre.', []), ('Gelechia capiteochrella', 'Gelechia capiteochrella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from Texas.The forewings are dark brown, with the extreme tip of the thorax, and a few minute spots on the forewings ochreous. One of these spots is on the fold towards the base, three or four others at about the middle of the wing, and there are two other minute ones in the apical part of the wing.', []), ('Gelechia caudatae', 'Gelechia caudatae is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from Washington.The larvae feed on Salix caudata.', []), ('Gelechia chionomima', 'Gelechia chionomima is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in South Africa.The wingspan is about 11 mm. The forewings are snow-white with a black costal streak from the base to the middle and a hemispherical leaden-grey tornal spot, edged black anteriorly, continued by a narrow irregular brown terminal fascia including a leaden-grey mark to the apex, its edge forming a short acute blackish projection in the disc. The hindwings are grey-whitish.', []), ('Gelechia clandestina', 'Gelechia clandestina is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Russia (Primorsky Krai, Sakhalin Island).', ['https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/df/Wikispecies-logo.svg', 'https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg']), ('Gelechia clopica', 'Gelechia clopica is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Argentina.', []), ('Gelechia conditor', 'Gelechia conditor is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Russia and Korea.', []), ('Gelechia cuneatella', 'Gelechia cuneatella, the long-winged groundling, is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It was described by Douglas in 1852. It is found in northern, central and eastern Europe, Russia, China (Xinjiang, Jilin) and Japan. The habitat consists of river banks and marshes.\nThe wingspan is 13–16 mm. Adult are on wing from August to September in one generation per year.The larvae feed on Salix species, living within a spun or rolled leaf of their host plant.', []), ('Gelechia cuneifera', 'Gelechia cuneifera is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Mexico (Guerrero).The wingspan is about 16 mm. The forewings are pale tawny grey, obscured at the apex and along the costa by darker shades of the same. The costal blotch extends from one-fifth to nearly three-fourths of the wing-length, its lower and inner edge shading to brownish fuscous, which forms first a broad wedge-shaped projection at about one-third, the apex crossing the fold, secondly, a brownish fuscous longitudinal streak reaching to the end of the cell above the middle of\nthe wing. Between this costal blotch and the broad terminal shade the paler ground-colour reaches to the costa, suggesting a pale transverse band. A few brownish fuscous scales are distributed in patches around the apex. The hindwings are very pale grey.', []), ('Gelechia cuspidatella', 'Gelechia cuspidatella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Libya.', []), ('Gelechia delapsa', 'Gelechia delapsa is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Brazil.The wingspan is about 22 mm. The forewings are pale brownish-ochreous with the basal area of the wing to one-third of the costa and to two-thirds of the dorsum fuscous suffusedly mixed blackish, edge suffused. The stigmata form small suffused dark fuscous spots, the plical obliquely before the first discal, within the edge of the dark area. There is a slight dark fuscous mark beneath the costa before the middle and a marginal series of small dark fuscous dots around the posterior part of the costa and termen. The hindwings are light grey irrorated fuscous.', []), ('Gelechia delodectis', 'Gelechia delodectis is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in China (Yunnan).', []), ('Gelechia desiliens', 'Gelechia desiliens is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from California.The wingspan is 19–22 mm. The forewings are light brownish with faint rosy tinge, irregularly mixed fuscous or dark grey and with a few whitish scales. The ccsta is more or less suffused dark fuscous towards the base. The stigmata are rather large, cloudy, dark fuscous or blackish, sometimes with adjacent lateral whitish scales, the plical slightly before the first discal, sometimes elongate. There is a whitish rather outwards-oblique line from three-fourths of the costa to the tornus, sinuate outwards in the middle and there are sometimes three or four small whitish marginal dots around the apex. The hindwings are whitish-grey, more whitish and thinly scaled anteriorly, the veins and termen suffused rather dark grey.', []), ('Gelechia diacmota', 'Gelechia diacmota is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Brazil.The wingspan is about 15 mm. The forewings are blackish with a straight narrow white subbasal fascia and a triangular white spot on the costa at three-fourths, and a narrow rather inwards-oblique transverse spot from the tornus reaching half across the wing and emitting from the apex two slender projections, the posterior touching the costal spot. There is also a white apical dot. The hindwings are rather dark grey, lighter anteriorly.', []), ('Gelechia discoanulella', 'Gelechia discoanulella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from Texas.The forewings are very pale ocherous, so densely dusted with greyish fuscus as almost entirely to conceal the ground color. The fold is ochreous yellow with two or three brown spots and there are two or three small brown spots on the disc, and a row of them around the apex. At the end of the discal cell is a pale ochreous annulus with a central dark brown spot.', []), ('Gelechia discostrigella', 'Gelechia discostrigella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from California.The base of the wings is purplish-brown beyond which to the middle they are creamy white, that colour extending along the dorsal margin to a point beyond the middle but scarcely to the middle on the costal margin. On the dorsal margin, about the middle and in the creamy white portion is an ocherous spot, and along the costal margin are two or three small brownish spots also in the creamy white part of the wing, which along the costal margin about the middle passes gradually into ocherous-yellow, as it also does on the dorsal margin beyond the middle. This ocherous hue overspreads the whole apical half of the wing. On the disc, before the middle, margining the creamy white anterior part of the wing, is an oblique black transverse spot which is narrowly separated by ocherous-yellow scales from a large somewhat diffuse brownish patch which covers the end of the cell and fades out gradually into the ocherous hue of that part of the wing. The extreme costa is marked throughout its length by small purple brown spots, which also extend around the apex at the base of the cilia which are greyish ocherous.', []), ('Gelechia dolbyi', 'Gelechia dolbyi is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Panama.The wingspan is about 14 mm. The forewings are dark brown, with an oblique yellowish white band commencing on the costa at one-fifth from the base and attenuate outward and downward to a little beyond the fold. There is a costal spot of the same colour, with a few whitish scales about the tornus. The hindwings are greyish fuscous.', []), ('Gelechia dromicella', 'Gelechia dromicella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from British Columbia, California, Colorado, Oklahoma, Saskatchewan and Washington.The wingspan is about 15 mm. The forewings are fuscous white, obscured by evenly overlaid dark fuscous scales. The extreme base of the costa is black and \nthere is a black streak through the center of the wing from the base to the apical third, interrupted on the middle of the cell by a pure white spot. At apical third is a transverse, poorly defined, pure white fascia, hardly reaching either margin. Outside of this fascia the apical part of the wing is strongly suffused with blackish fuscous. The hindwings are iridescent whitish fuscous.', ['https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e1/Gelechia_dromicella.JPG']), ('Gelechia dujardini', 'Gelechia dujardini is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in France (Alpes Maritimes), Croatia, North Macedonia, Greece, Italy and Turkey.The length of the forewings 4.7-5.9 mm. The forewings are blackish-brown. The hindwings are greyish-brown with brownish scales. Adults are on wing from mid-June to the end of September, probably in two generations per year.\nThe larvae possibly feed on Acer species.', []), ('Gelechia dyariella', 'Gelechia dyariella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from Alberta, California, Colorado, Maine, Manitoba, Montana and Saskatchewan.The wingspan is 14–18 mm. The forewings are whitish, but so heavily overlaid with dark fuscous and bluish black scales as to give the appearance to the naked eye of dark gray. At the base is an oblique, ill-defined, obscure, blackish streak and on the middle of the wing is a black oval dot followed by a short space of pure white. At the apical third is a large transverse blackish area across the wing, edged on the outside by a narrow zigzag white fascia. The hindwings are light silvery fuscous, darker toward the apex.\nThe larvae feed on Populus fremontii by folding up a young leaf by uniting the edges around the margin so that it forms a bag or box.', []), ('Gelechia dzunmodi', 'Gelechia dzunmodi is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Palearctic realm.', []), ('Gelechia ekhingolica', 'Gelechia ekhingolica is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Palearctic realm.', []), ('Gelechia elephantopis', 'Gelechia elephantopis is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Venezuela.', []), ('Gelechia epistolica', 'Gelechia epistolica is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Tibet.The wingspan is 22–23 mm. The forewings are light grey, irregularly irrorated grey-whitish and darker grey and with a small elongate blackish spot on the base of the costa. The discal stigmata are represented by dark grey spots, the first oblique-triangular, the second transverse. There are small irregular spots of blackish irroration around the apical part of the costa and termen. The hindwings are light grey.', []), ('Gelechia exclarella', 'Gelechia exclarella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Puerto Rico.', []), ('Gelechia exposita', 'Gelechia exposita is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found on Borneo.The wingspan is about 15 mm. The forewings are white, with scattered fuscous scales and blackish markings. There is a short mark from the base of the costa, and a small spot on the costa near the base. There is a dot in the disc at one-fifth and a rather oblique streak from the costa at one-fourth, somewhat dilated towards the fold, and with a small tuft on the anterior edge on the fold, not reaching the dorsum. There is a small spot on the costa before the middle and a dot in the disc beneath this, and one at two-thirds. There is also a spot on the costa at three-fifths and a raised transverse mark above the dorsum before the tornus. There are also small spots on the costa at three-fourths and at the apex, as well as some irregular clouding of dark fuscous irroration towards the termen. The hindwings are subhyaline very pale bluish-grey, darker towards the apex.', []), ('Gelechia farinosa', 'Gelechia farinosa is a moth of the family Gelechiidae first described by Karl August Teich in 1899. It is found in Lithuania.', []), ('Gelechia flavipalpella', 'Gelechia flavipalpella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in the Democratic Republic of Congo and South Africa.The wingspan is about 17 mm. The forewings are fuscous with a purplish tinge and with an almost obsolete darker fuscous spot beyond the end of the cell. The hindwings are cinereous.', ['https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/74/Red_Pencil_Icon.png', 'https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/df/Wikispecies-logo.svg', 'https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg']), ('Gelechia flexurella', 'Gelechia flexurella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from Pennsylvania.The forewings are greyish fuscous, with a pale greyish band near the apex margined internally on the costa by a blackish-brown spot, with another of the same hue about the middle of the costa and another on the costa near the base. Near the base of the fold is a rather faint dark brownish spot, and the wing is sprinkled with dark brown atoms. The hindwings are dark fuscous.', []), ('Gelechia frequens', 'Gelechia frequens is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Australia, where it has been recorded from Queensland.The wingspan is about 10 mm. The forewings are whitish irrorated dark fuscous and with seven or eight blackish spots along the costa and a blackish mark on the fold towards the base. The stigmata are represented by blackish spots, the discal remote, an additional spot between these, the plical beneath first the discal. There are two confluent blackish spots before the upper part of the termen. The hindwings are light grey, paler and thinly scaled in the disc and towards the base.', []), ('Gelechia fuscooculata', 'Gelechia fuscooculata is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Russia and Japan.', []), ('Gelechia gammanella', 'Gelechia gammanella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found on Borneo.Adults are dark cupreous, the forewings rounded at the tips with a yellow costal triangular spot at three-fourths of the length, emitting a slight streak to the disk. The exterior border is convex and very oblique.', []), ('Gelechia goniospila', 'Gelechia goniospila is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Argentina.', []), ('Gelechia gracula', 'Gelechia gracula is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from Texas.The wingspan is 12–13 mm. The forewings are ashy-grey irrorated blackish with a broad white costal streak speckled dark grey from the base to beyond the middle, marked at the base of the costa with a black dot and minute linear subcostal mark beyond this. The stigmata represented by spots of blackish irroration ringed or laterally edged white, a more or less marked dark streak connecting the discal stigmata, these lying in the upper margin of dark area, the first discal elongate, the second small, roundish, the plical elongate, hardly before first the discal. There is an obtusely angulated white transverse shade at three-fourths more or less expressed, often a streak around the margins or sometimes the whole apical area beyond this whitish irrorated dark grey. The hindwings are grey, pale towards the base.', []), ('Gelechia griseaella', 'Gelechia griseaella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from Ontario.The forewings are white, overlaid with brown, so as to give a greyish cast. In the costal and apical portions of the wing the brown scales are condensed into numerous irregular and indefinite spots and streaks.', []), ('Gelechia griseella', 'Gelechia griseella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from Texas.Adults are pale grey, the extreme costa at the base, and the inner angle of the forewings dark brown, and the base towards the dorsal margin suffused with faint reddish yellow. The disc from the base nearly to the middle is suffused with brown, and there are faint brownish streaks between the veins in the apical part of the wing.', []), ('Gelechia grisseochrella', 'Gelechia grisseochrella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from California.There is a dark brown streak perpendicular to the base of the dorsal margin, a small dark brown spot just above the fold (sometimes touching it), before the middle. Following is an oblong oblique dark brown spot on the fold, very narrowly margined above with whitish scales and there is a row of small dark brown spots along the costa, one at the end of the cell, and a row of them around the apex at the base of the cilia.', []), ('Gelechia haifella', 'Gelechia haifella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Palestine.', []), ('Gelechia hetaeria', 'Gelechia hetaeria is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Mexico (Veracruz).The wingspan is about 15 mm. The forewings are rosy greyish fuscous, a black spot at the base of the costa and three elongate black spots, somewhat ill-defined, along the discal cell, with a small one beyond the end of the cell and a few black marginal spots around the apex. The hindwings are pale leaden grey.', []), ('Gelechia hippophaella', 'The sea buckthorn moth (Gelechia hippophaella) is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found from Fennoscandia to the Pyrenees, Italy and Romania and from Great Britain to Ukraine.\n\nThe wingspan is 17–21 mm. Adults are on wing from July to September.\nThe larvae feed on Hippophae rhamnoides. They have been recorded mining the leaves of their host plant. The mine has the form of an irregular corridor or blotch. After some time the larvae live free among spun leaves. Other authors only record it spinning leaves and buds. Larvae can be found in June and July. They are greyish green with a light brown head. Last instar larvae are tinged with pink.', ['https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/24/Gelechia_hippophaella.JPG', 'https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/26/Gelechia_hippophaella_a_shoot_of_Hippophae_rhamnoides_eaten_by_larva.JPG', 'https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/37/Gelechia_hippophaella_larva.JPG', 'https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/ee/Gelechia_hippophaella.jpg']), ('Gelechia horiaula', 'Gelechia horiaula is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in north-western India.The wingspan is about 13 mm. The forewings are dark fuscous, somewhat whitish-sprinkled towards the margins and with ochreous-white markings. There is a moderate transverse fascia from the costa at one-fourth, not reaching the dorsum. A transverse spot is found in the disc beyond the middle, not reaching the costa or the dorsum, both its sides prominent in the middle. There is also a semicircular blotch on the costa about four-fifths. The hindwings are grey.', []), ('Gelechia hyoscyamella', 'Gelechia hyoscyamella is a moth of the family Gelechiidae. It is found in Egypt.The wingspan is 11–12 mm. The forewings are ochreous-yellow, sprinkled with brownish and with brownish ill-defined streaks. The hindwings are grey, with ochreous-yellow margins.', [])]